---
layout: post
title:  "Accelleraffewting Samtools"
date:   2017-08-07
categories: samtools zlib htslib intel ipp knl
---

TACC recently rolled out the first stage of [Stampede2](https://www.tacc.utexas.edu/systems/stampede2), a 12.7PF system consisting of 4,200 Intel Knights Landing nodes, and currently ranked at [#12 on the Top500](https://www.top500.org/system/179045).

| | Stamped1 | Stampede2 |
|-|--|--|
| Cores | 16 | 68 |
| Frequency | 2.7GHz | 1.4GHz |
| Memory | 32GB | 112GB |
| Accelerator | KNC/GPU | NA |

While Stampede2 has more than 4 times as many cores as Stamped1, it also runs at about half the clock rate. This new system is great for threaded and distributed code, but extremely inefficient for sequential software. To ensure a good experience for all Stampede2 users, the Life Sciences group has been rebuilding their software stack from scratch - specifically choosing and optimizing applications that will run well on KNLs.

One of the most essential tools for bioinformatics is [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/), a suite of programs for interacting with *most* high-throughput sequencing data. This program utilizes pthreads to allow for concurrent sorting and compression workers. This is fairly decent, but I decided to look for new ways to optimize the code for our hardware.

After some searching, I came across [a benchmarking page](www.htslib.org/benchmarks/zlib.html) on the htslib website, which compared the runtime of different implementations of the zlib compression library. Most aligners produce `.sam` files, and samtools is used to filter and convert this data into the binary `.bam` format, which is compressed and indexed for archiving. Any time the file is read it must be decompressed, so accellerating the compression and decompression will benefit most bioinformatics workflows. I tracked down Intel's guide for ["Building a faster ZLIB with Intel® Integrated Performance Primitives"](https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/how-to-use-zlib-with-intel-ipp-opertimization), and got to work building a new zlib and linking it to samtools.

## Building zlib

I first had to track down the zlib patch on our system, and untar the actual patch file.

```shell
# Patch zlib
tar -xzf $IPPROOT/examples/components_and_examples_lin_ps.tgz ./components/interfaces/ipp_zlib/zlib-1.2.8.patch
patch -p1 < components/interfaces/ipp_zlib/zlib-1.2.8.patch
```

Then I loaded the IPP development environment.

```
# Source IPP environment
source /opt/intel/compilers_and_libraries_2017.4.196/linux/ipp/bin/ippvars.sh intel64
source /opt/intel/compilers_and_libraries_2017.4.196/linux/bin/compilervars.sh intel64
```

Lastly, I compiled zlib for both AVX2 and AVX512 64-bit systems. I deviated slightly from the Intel guide when linking the IPP libraries in the LDFLAGS because I choose to use the static versions. This enables users to simply link `libz.so` into their code without needing to link the IPP libraries as well, providing a seamless experience.

```
# Compile zlib
export CFLAGS="-O3 -xCORE-AVX2 -axMIC-AVX512,CORE-AVX512 -fPIC -m64 -DWITH_IPP -I$IPPROOT/include"
export LDFLAGS="$IPPROOT/lib/intel64/libippdc.a $IPPROOT/lib/intel64/libipps.a $IPPROOT/lib/intel64/libippcore.a"
./configure --prefix=%{INSTALL_DIR}
make -j3 shared
make DESTDIR=${RPM_BUILD_ROOT} install
```

You can find the the RPM spec file that I wrote [online in our github](https://github.com/TACC/lifesci_spec/blob/separate-rpms/zlib-1.2.8-1.spec) for full reference.

## Static linking to samtools

After building zlib, I could then compile samtools against it.

## Dynamic linking

## Tests

### Shared memory

### Lustre

### Compatibility

